# Modeling Signals from Distant Emissions

This is a repository of codes written in Python 3 using the Spyder tool to estimate the cosmological parameters from supernovae type Ia (SNe Ia) and Tip of the Red Giant Branch (TRGB) data. The important point here is that the data tables present not only the TRANSFORMED distance data, commonly referred to as distance magnitude or sometimes as μ, but the more important actual distances and associated errors as Mpc (Megaparsec). These are the data from 1701 SNe Ia in the article by Brout et al. (2022) vol.938:110, the Pantheon+ data. We also use 18 TRGB (Tip of the Red Giant Branch stars) observations, from the Freedman group (2019) "The Carnegie-Chicago Hubble Program. VIII. An Independent Determination of the Hubble Constant Based on the Tip of the Red Giant Branch" vol.882:34. These data are included in some data sets and also as a stand-alone for a few Hubble constant determinations. Finally 16 measurements of TRGB emissions from Anand et al. (2022) "Comparing Tip of the Red Giant Branch Distance Scales: An Independent Reduction of the Carnegie-Chicago Hubble Program and the Value of the Hubble Constant" vol.932:15 are also included in some data ensembles and as stand-alone for Hubble constant determinations.

Most programs were written using the curve_fit routine to solve nonlinear estimates using the actual distances versus redshift, z. (The redshift is linearly proportional to the recession velocity by the speed of light.) Several straightforward, currently popular models are presented including the ΛCDM (Lambda Cold Dark Matter) model labeled by some as the “standard model” of cosmology. These are presented in great detail in the Curve_Fit folder. 

These evaluations present several statistic calculations. First, is the typical r^2 correlation which is of only middling usefulness with SNe Ia and TRGB data, since many analyses report r^2 of approximately 0.99. Second, is the F-test (or F statistic or F stat) which is a rarely used, statistical test being very sensitive to correlation without an upper limit. It is useful across models with different number of free parametters using large data ensembles. Third, is a version of the chi^2 calculation as commonly performed by astronomers (see Riess et al. 1998 AJ Vol. 116 p. 1009-1038) but other wise is an uncommon varient of the chi^2 statistic. Fourth, are calculations of the values of the Bayesian Information Criteria (BIC).  It is observed that the BIC test is not really useful for comparing unrelated models with the SNe Ia data and ends up only really indicating the number of free parameters in the model. Specifically, the low BIC values calculated for the Einstein-DeSitter model variants do not reflect the relative failure of these models compared to models based on the Friedmann-Lemaitre-Robertson-Walker (FLRW) approximation, which when plotted appear to better fit the SNe Ia data. The F-test values increase dramatically with better correlation and more data, this statistic seems best for model evaluation of SNe Ia data and TRGB star emissions, across models with differeing numbers of free parameters.

The other, Least_Squares folder, presents the codes and some results using only some of the SNe Ia and TRGB data. These codes were written because least_squares routine is more flexible, allowing several different minimization techniques, often called robust minimization. These techniques tend to downplay the importance of the most noisy data.

For convenience a few data ensembles are provided in the same folders as the evaluation codes. The user must be careful to adjust the data number (N) to acurately reflect the real number of data pairs. This value is required for accurate calculations of statistics. Also note the correct parameter number, P, must be used for most statistics.

The public is welcome to download the data and codes.



